---
title: "brah"
permalink: "/brah"
excerpt: "Boys hide, men vanish."
date: 2024-10-04"
categories:
  - blog 
tags: 
  - vent 
header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/posts/fat-man-frank-reppold-pixabay-1280.jpg"
--- 

I mean, who do you think you are, really?

You've come into a thriving spiritual community that has given you everything - an enlightened teacher, training in the Dhammavinaya, a roof over your head, choice food in your belly, and as much time as you need to cultivate stillness. 

It's never enough for people like you though, is it mate?

You're a taker. No matter how much you're given, you always want more. You're always scheming to do as little as you can, whilst receiving the most. You're smarter than these people, aren't you?

You think you're on to a good thing - you've figured out how to move in the shadows and game the system. You're like the breath - you're that unnoticed and that necessary; sweetly feeding all with your natural intelligence. 

You really are that stupid. 

You're not even in the game. You're a spectactor, a faker, a parasitic presence feeding off it's host that doesn't give the barest gesture of respect for all that they've been given. The selfishness, greed and indolence you dumbly display like a virtue are the deepest kind of delusion. 

Have you ever given yourself to anything other than yourself? Have you had the heart to let go of the incessent and predictable self-interest that only ever wishes to serve one thing? 

I know some small, shrivelled, blackened little part of your heart has a higher purpose in mind, and as hopelessly latent as that present possibility is, you have the choice to let your mind fuse into that higher aspiration, make it bigger, and learn to respect something other than your ego, and your juvenile conceit. Sacrifice your self at the altar of Dhamma. 

Lay life is turning into an obscene kind of fully-automated-luxury-space-capitalism - a world in which human agency is erased, and we all live cut-off from one another in small, plush pods filled with techno-toys, living off residual income from crypto derivatives, contributing nothing of real value. It's the kind of world where the depth and magnanimity of humanity is reduced to a blinking, drooling gibbon; ever distracted and babbling at flickering, digitised hallucinations as it's brainwashed into banality.

Don't bring that in here. This Dhamma is the antithesis of all your vacuous, worldy ways. 

Don't be like so many others and turn this beautiful renunciant life into faux-*nekkhamma*. If you want an easy life so you can lie around like Jabba the Hutt, or a platform to play out the weird dress-rehearsal of your irrelative former lay life, then bro... just leave. 

Or better yet, wake up and realise where you are. You've landed in greatness. The stakes are high in the monastic life - the kamma you create, whether for personal gain or selfless giving, will come back to you amplified in untold fold. So tread lightly, and make good choices. 

Learn the art of giving, taker. 


- Peace

Photo credit: Frank Repold via [**Pixabay**](https://pixabay.com)
